core: faster recovery from rbd rwo node loss (#12286)
rook/rook: Documentation/Storage-Configuration/Block-Storage-RBD/block-storage.md

    ```console
    NAME        CLUSTER-IP   EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)        AGE
    wordpress   10.3.0.155   <pending>     80:30841/TCP   2m

> ```

Reviewer: It may mess up the rendering if these ticks change indentation. This was an automatic change in your editor?

Author: yes, reverted

The erasure coded pool must be set as the `dataPool` parameter in
[`storageclass-ec.yaml`](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/master/deploy/examples/csi/rbd/storage-class-ec.yaml) It is used for the data of the RBD images.

> ### Node Loss

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Node Loss
```

> In case, a node is lost where a pod is running with the RBD RWO volume is mounted, the volume cannot automatically be mounted on another node. To recover, confirm the node is down and then add the below taint to the node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a node goes down where a pod is running where a RBD RWO volume is mounted, the volume cannot automatically be mounted on another node. The node must be guaranteed to be offline before the volume can be mounted on another node.
```

!!! Note
    These instructions are for clusters with Kubernetes version 1.26 or greater. For K8s 1.25 or older, see the [manual steps in the CSI troubleshooting guide](../../Troubleshooting/ceph-csi-common-issues.md#node-loss) to recover from the node loss.

> Deploy the csi-addons crds:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy the csi-addons manifests:
```

> Deploy the csi-addons crds:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure CSI-Addons
```

```console
kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/v0.7.0/deploy/controller/crds.yaml
kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/v0.7.0/deploy/controller/rbac.yaml
kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/v0.7.0/deploy/controller/setup-controller.yaml
```

enable the `csi-addons` sidecar in operator yaml configuration

```console
kubectl patch cm rook-ceph-operator-config -n<namespace> -p $'data:\n "CSI_ENABLE_CSIADDONS": "true"'
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Handling Node Loss

When a node is confirmed to be down, add the following taints to the node:
```

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule
```

> After the taint is added to the node, Rook will blocklist the node to prevent connections to Ceph from the RBD volume on that node. See verify a node is blocklisted:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the taint is added to the node, Rook will automatically blocklist the node to prevent connections to Ceph from the RBD volume on that node. To verify a node is blocklisted:
```

```console
kubectl get networkfences.csiaddons.openshift.io
NAME           DRIVER                       CIDRS                     FENCESTATE   AGE   RESULT
minikube-m02   rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com   ["192.168.39.187:0/32"]   Fenced       20s   Succeeded
```

The node is blocklisted if the state is `Fenced` and the result is `Succeeded` as seen above.

> ## Node Recovery

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Node Recovery
```

The erasure coded pool must be set as the `dataPool` parameter in
[`storageclass-ec.yaml`](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/master/deploy/examples/csi/rbd/storage-class-ec.yaml) It is used for the data of the RBD images.

## Node Loss

If a node goes down where a pod is running where a RBD RWO volume is mounted, the volume cannot automatically be mounted on another node. The node must be guaranteed to be offline before the volume can be mounted on another node.

!!! Note
    These instructions are for clusters with Kubernetes version 1.26 or greater. For K8s 1.25 or older, see the [manual steps in the CSI troubleshooting guide](../../Troubleshooting/ceph-csi-common-issues.md#node-loss) to recover from the node loss.

### Configure CSI-Addons

Deploy the csi-addons manifests:

```console
kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/v0.7.0/deploy/controller/crds.yaml
kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/v0.7.0/deploy/controller/rbac.yaml
kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/v0.7.0/deploy/controller/setup-controller.yaml
```

> enable the `csi-addons` sidecar in operator yaml configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the `csi-addons` sidecar in the Rook operator configuration.
```

> The erasure coded pool must be set as the `dataBlockPool` parameter in

Reviewer: Please remove this whole section on the Flex Driver (lines 199-201). It's very stale information.

[`storageclass-ec.yaml`](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/master/deploy/examples/flex/storage-class-ec.yaml). It is used for
the data of the RBD images.

> ### Recover RBD RWO volume in case of Node Loss

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Node Loss
```

!!! Note

>     The minimum required Kubernetes version require for this to support is v1.26 and assuming [CSI-add-ons](https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/latest/Storage-Configuration/Ceph-CSI/ceph-csi-drivers/?h=csiaddons#csi-addons-controller) CRD is deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    These instructions are for clusters with Kubernetes version 1.26 or greater. For K8s 1.25 or older, see the [manual steps in the CSI troubleshooting guide](<link>) to recover from the node loss. 
```

> 

Reviewer: Let's document the command for installing the CSI addons. Then they can follow the instructions directly from this guide, instead of following a link to the CSI addons. It seems simple to include here.

Author: added and while adding the steps I realise to enable this feature by default once user has the csi addons crd, we also need to enable `csi-addons` side which I think is missing part for automating whole process. I'm thinking of two approach here:

1. Enable `csi-addons` by default
2. Enable `csi-addons` when tainit is added and `csi-addons` crds are present. In this case, I'll add code to wait if all rbd csi-pods are running state

@travisn @Madhu-1 let me know if you have other approach or suggestion

Author: Also, do you want to modify the design doc too?

Reviewer 2: That is reason i suggested disabling it by default and enable only if user wants. RBD csi driver might be enabled or might not be enabled by default.  Lets document the steps to enable the node watcher if user wants

Author: @travisn ^

Reviewer: Do we need the csi addons sidecar enabled for this scenario? Or is the node watcher controller started with the above manifests?

Author: we need csi-addons sidecar to be enabled

Reviewer: Honestly, these steps are complicated for the user to enable this feature. This is a good reminder that when creating a new feature it's good to start with the user documentation so we can see if it's simple enough.

IMO we really need to automatically enable the CSI addons sidecar if the CRDs are found. That would remove this step of enabling the setting. The user could choose to override it if they want to disable it, but at least the default should be to enable it with the CRDs.

The CSI addons is really feeling like a heavyweight solution to the node loss. Rook could easily just blocklist and unblocklist the nodes directly without using the CRD. I wonder if we should provide that implementation in the future if there is feedback that CSI addons are too much overhead for the users. I do still like that the blocklisting is tracked with a CRD so the admin can get status on blocklisting. Let's not implement the direct blocklisting now, but let's see about the feedback...

Author: I would like apologize for missing this requirement, it slipped my mind since the option was already in operator yaml.

We can definitely look for other options in future

Author: I don't want to rush the pr mentioned below or maybe even close that depending on what we decide. I just created what I had in mind before I forget since I'll be off sometime next week. 

#12487

> In case, a node is lost where a pod is running with the RBD RWO volume is mounted, the volume cannot automatically be mounted on another node. To recover this situation, add the below taint on the node once admin confirms node is down.

Reviewer: Let's move this intro paragraph before the note.
```suggestion
In case, a node is lost where a pod is running with the RBD RWO volume is mounted, the volume cannot automatically be mounted on another node. To recover, confirm the node is down and then add the below taint to the node
```

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute

> # or

Reviewer: Seems like we should recommend they add both types of taints. Anyway, Rook will only care about the NoExecute, right? But K8s will care about NoSchedule.
```suggestion
```

Author: rook will care about taint `key` wich is `out-of-service`.
Also, do you want to modify the design doc too?

kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule
```

> After the taint is added rook will create the network fence to blocklist the node, confirm this by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the taint is added to the node, Rook will blocklist the node to prevent connections to Ceph from the RBD volume on that node. See verify a node is blocklisted:
```

```console
kubectl get networkfences.csiaddons.openshift.io
```

> make sure that the network fence state is `Fenced` and result is `Succeeded`.

Reviewer: Can you also show an example output?
```suggestion
The node is blocklisted if the state is `Fenced` and the result is `Succeeded`. 
```

> 

Reviewer: Let's add a separate title for unblocklisting.
```suggestion
## Node Recovery
```

> Once the node is back online, remove the taint from the node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the node comes back online, the network fence can be removed from the node by removing the node taints:
```

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute-

> # or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
